But I think it was also the singing and setting up of
the bonfire, all of that was just such a treat
because never had she experienced something like
that before. All right, that first year, you
didn't encounter any hazing then. No. You weren't
a fish in the normal sense of the word. No, I didn't,
but I think I began to hear about, I knew I had some
freshmen, and I knew I had friends of mine that were
fish. A lot of my classmates from Bryan did not join
the Corps, though I saw them occasionally. But I
guess those schoolmates of mine that ended up
going, I remember them, and I saw them in their
uniform and short hair and kind of in their state of
shock at first. And I remember them. I guess the
other thing that I remember quite vividly was
during the bonfire, during the cutting of the
bonfire, how many of them were just dozing off in
class. And so it was those kinds of experiences
that I did remember, and at least from seeing the
students. All right, describe, you went to class
on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. Describe that
day. You got up at what time, came to campus, did
what, and so forth. I usually would get up probably
about, my class was usually about 8 o'clock. I'd
try to get up as early as possible so we could get out
by 12. I imagine we got up about a quarter to 7, got
ready, and of course just lived in West Bryan and
just take on Finnfeather. I could get to school in
about 10, 15 minutes and park. Parking was not a big
deal. Yeah, where did you park? I parked across
from the drill field, that parking lot that still
exists there. And
walked the academic building, Nagel Hall, where
most of my classes were. And then where would lunch
be? Lunch would be back home probably because we
would eat right before we went to work. And so my mom
would have us some lunch, and then she'd give us a
sack lunch for dinner where we would eat. But there
was my brother, Moises, and I, and another friend
named Mario, and they both would come back home to
find lunch. And they worked to death to get the
lunch and take the получить the lunch. So it was
pretty much the same, the three of us pretty much
had the same routine. So we'd see each other get in
their cars, leaving or whatever, about the same
time. I did start getting involved with school
stuff later, but when I guess I started being able
to work a little less. about a repeat of the fall in
terms of the, you took. Another 12, 13 hours and,
you know, I was always a full-time student and then
I think two or three of my summers I ended up going to
summer school. Right. Do you remember what your
major was those first two semesters? My first
semester it was history. Why? Because I had always
liked history. I had thought of anthropology at
some time but it never really gels. And then when
political science department, I guess came,
sprung from history, I guess it was, then I went
into the political science. But I started with
history. What did you think your career was going
to be? What did you hope you were going to? Well, I
had thought of being a lawyer at that time. Why?
Well, I guess I began to get in my, to my courses. At
that time the Hispanic, the Hispanic movement was
beginning to get the notion of young Hispanics
becoming lawyers or doctors and, you know, and
promoting those professions became more and
more. And I, I guess I began to see myself as someone
who could become a lawyer and so that was, I mean, I
started thinking about that but I thought about it
more seriously obviously as I got. Was there a
person that was a role model that you now realize
somebody that, oh, he or she is a lawyer, I'd like to
be? No, because quite frankly in Bryan there were
no, I didn't know really any lawyers. I knew some of
the judges here. My brothers and I started going to
a prayer meeting early, early in the, when I was
nine years old. But I didn't, we didn't know the men
that personally but they were Judge Barron and
some of the others who were Judge Davis, W.C.
Davis. But no, I can't say that there was one person
who
inspired me to say you can be a lawyer or you ought to
be a lawyer. I just wanted to achieve. I wanted to,
to do the best I could and to be successful. How did
you dress in those days as an Aggie freshman? Well,
blue jeans and, and shirts, I mean, t-shirts or,
not t-shirts but it was another, it had shirts
with, I think it was blue jeans. Because we had some
bell-bottom pants but they weren't that
bell-bottom. But mainly blue jeans, you know, and
shirt. Now were you clean-shaven then? I had,
well I, yes, I had a mustache. And. As a freshman?
No, my mustache came I think when I was like a
sophomore or junior. I think that's when it began.
And.
Why I, I think my, I think my older brother started
wearing a mustache and I thought, well I'll try
one. But other than that, I mean, I, I didn't have a
beard or anything. And your hair was what length?
Oh, I would say it would, it would reach my
shoulders. It wasn't, it wasn't long. I mean, it
wasn't something that I had, I couldn't. But it
was, it was very, very manageable. I mean,
nowadays it would be considered relatively mild.
The first year or two, what did you and your, your
buddies do on a Saturday night to have fun? Where
did y'all go play? Well, I guess we'd go to the
movies downtown. We'd play, we'd go bowling. Go to
pizza, get some pizza. Of course, we'd go to
football games. There was always a, there was
always those concerts before the football games
that we went to. I
can't say there was much, much more to do. Did. Was,
was it normal for you and your buddies to go have
beer somewhere? No, because, well, because we, I
didn't drink. And, and the friends that we hung
around with were basically non-drinkers also. So
that never really was one of those, one of those
traditions or activities we engaged in. It was
really kind of. If you needed advice that first
year, to whom did you turn other than a brother? No,
no, no. Was there anybody on campus with whom you,
that you turned to for, about what courses to take
or? No, not that first year. Later there was a
couple of people, but that. Who, who'd it be then,
later? Was, Wayne Stark was probably one of the.
How did you meet him? Well, my sophomore, latter
second semester of my sophomore year, a friend of
mine, who was a graduate student, we started
talking about. Yeah. establishing a group on
campus, a Hispanic group, and Wayne Stark had
worked with a lot of the MSC groups, so we went to
visit him and he was very, very supportive, very
inspirational about achievement. He had worked
with Henry Cisneros and Hector Gutierrez and a
group of other students that he had sort of
mentored and worked with and that's why he was a guy
that could make you feel like, wow, I can
accomplish something. And so I was very
appreciative of Mr. Wayne Stark because he had
this enthusiasm for making students feel good
about themselves and really asking good
questions about why and what do you mean by that and
I mean, I mean. Not to challenge one, but to make you
think critically. Now, you mentioned Hector and
Henry, they were already gone, they had to
graduate. Yes, right, they were a few years ahead,
but I was aware of them through, I can't remember
how, I guess just some different dialogue we had
had and I met them later. I mean, when I was in
college, I had met a couple of them. Did y'all
organize a group? Yes, a group of us did and in fact
it's called the Committee on the Awareness of the
Mexican-American Culture. It's CAMOC, the
Committee on the Awareness of the
Mexican-American Culture. One of the things that
my buddies and I began to see and these were
students that were in the core, non-core,
graduate students and undergrads. One of the
things that we noticed that was that we felt that
the reason why other students felt, you know, that
they were somewhat,
they saw us differently was because they didn't
understand the culture. And so we thought, why not
let's form a group that talks about the Hispanic
culture, the Mexican-American culture, what it
is, what it's not, and help in that vein. And the MSC
became the sponsor group for that and so that's
where I started getting involved with that
activity. All right, now let's cover the whole
four years from here on. Generalize about the
Hispanic student body here. Where were they from,
what was their background and so forth at A&M in
those years? I think a lot of them came from San
Antonio in the Valley. There's a good number from
Houston. Laredo had always a large number, the
Laredo hometown club, there was always a strong
group. Yeah. And they were mainly boys because the
girls were beginning to barely start coming in,
but it wasn't really a stronghold there. I mean, I
graduated in December of 73 so the girls hadn't
really started coming in. The students came from
families that were probably middle income or
better. Were they first generation college
students? Or some of them second? I would say they
were. I think it was the second generation. A lot of
them were second generation because their
parents had gone to school somewhere else. I heard
later, which I thought made sense, from Laredo, a
lot of the Aggie mothers there had gone. There's
kids that had gone to Laredo Community College.
And once they got out, they sent their kids. And the
mothers of these kids, they had gone to UT or had
gone to some other school, but they sent their kids
to A&M. And I don't know what that connection was
from the very beginning, but a lot of
Mexican-American kids. But there were also some
of the kids who were very modest means. I mean, one
of my best friends, Steven Salinas, who's an
engineer, finished with a chemical engineering
degree with a 4.0. And his brother finished here
and went on to UT Medical Center. Both came from a
home in West Laco, one-room house. And her mother
was a nurse. And they worked. I mean, they were just
poor. Now, did you all create KAMAK because you
wanted to keep people from harassing you? Were you
all being bothered? No, no. It wasn't harassment
because it was never that physical. That's what I
thought. But it was more of a sense of
connectivity. In other words, a lot of this was
driven by what a lot of the other kids were feeling.
From Laredo and from the Valley. Because for them,
coming to this environment was really, really
tough. I was used to this environment. So, I mean,
to me, it was not such an environment that I was not
used to. I mean, being the only Hispanic in an
all-white setting, that was not unusual. But this
was a very interesting time, I guess, the career,
the life of this state. In the late 60s, the
Chicano, the so-called Hispanic Chicano
movement was getting started. So, you would begin
to hear and see literature that talked about this.
Well, being 18, 19 years old, it was the kind of
stuff that, okay, what is that all about? So, it
awakened a lot of ideas about culture, language,
history. Well, where is our history? Where is our
background? Where do you see that? So, it began to
raise a lot of those questions. So, it was one of
those, the timing of it was just right. Had it
happened five years before, that wouldn't have
been the case. But it was a question of what was
going on. What was going on in a larger external
part of this state that impacted us? Were there
some key professional staff and or faculty, other
than Wayne Stark, that were positive in helping
you all? Yeah. I think Chuck McCandless was one of
them. He began to see the effort. Billy Lay, the
director of admissions at that time. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And we had worked with him
because we were trying to recruit students.
Mm-hmm. I mean, we wanted to see how could we help
create a positive feeling for Hispanic students.
How could we help recruit students? So, we kind of
on our own took that as an opportunity. We found
ourselves to be somewhat privileged to be able to
achieve what we were achieving going to college.
And we wanted to see how do we bring more students
in. I mean, it's some of the same thing that's
happening now. But I haven't heard you infer in any
way that this was intended to be some kind of
protest. Oh, no. No, no. By no means. Because, I
mean, I think we saw the A&M family being big enough
to welcome people who were very different. And, by
the way, at the same time, Hispanics and African
Americans, we sort of connected because there
were very few African American students on
campus. And most of them were athletes. So, there
was a... There was a connectivity there. And they
felt alienated. They felt somewhat ostracized.
Not that anybody would intentionally do
something and say, get out of here, whatever. It
was just there was not a social connection with a
lot of the students. All right. In terms of
vocabulary, in that era, normally, what did you
and your associates, what wording did you all use
to identify yourselves? As far as Latinos? Yeah,
yeah. You weren't... You weren't Chicano. Well,
no, there were Chicanos. No. Did you use that word
very often? Yes, a lot of the students did. What was
the preferable term? I think the word Chicano,
Mexican-American, it depended on what part of the
state you were from. No, I'm talking about here.
What I'm saying, when people came to school here
from other parts of the state, some came and they
would say, don't ever call me Chicano because my
parents, they don't like that word, They don't
like the people from the Valley. Others, it was not
such a bad... In San Antonio, there was not such a
bad deal. It all depended on who it was and where
they were from. What was the most widely accepted
term? I said Chicano was because part of it was,
again, there were groups that were getting
started that would use the word Chicano. The word
Chicano has always been part of our language, but
it was used mainly among the groups. Here was,
okay, let's surface. This group is a word that
describes us as a group versus what the government
has decided to call us, Mexican-American or
whatever. It was more or less, we've decided who we
are and we're going to use this term because it best
describes us. In makeup, almost every single
person in your group was Mexican-American, not
from any other Latin background. No, it was being
Mexican-American. Almost no Mexican nationals.
No, because most of those would have been probably
more associated with the international
students. Okay. Let's see. Did I cut off a while
ago, you said Chuck McCandless. Were there any
other staff or faculty that were very helpful to
you all during this time? Billy Lay, like I said. I
think those were pretty much some of the... The
ones that struck out the most. Did you have a
sponsor? Did you have to have an advisor? Yes, and I
don't remember who that was when it first started.
I don't remember who that was exactly. Now, I'm
assuming that in terms of religious affiliation,
you would have been an exception as a Methodist.
Yes, yes, because everybody else among the
Hispanics were all Catholic. That's what I would
have... But... There were some good number of
Baptist students who came. Really? Yes. Okay. So
there was a... In fact, my mother, at our home,
every Sunday we would have... Ever since my
brothers were in college, and even when I went, we
would invite friends of ours to come eat lunch with
us at my dad's house, at our house. And my mother
would make caldo de res, you know, broth of beef.
Mm-hmm. And some mole, chicken mole. And that was
sort of our treat. And we would have maybe anywhere
from five to ten college students that would come
over and have... I've had guys that they were five,
six, eight years old, and they'd say, Oh, I
remember. I know who you are. I used to go to your
house with your brothers all the time. So, I mean,
I've had that happen to me even a couple of years
ago. Let's see. Back in student. Life. Did you and
your buddies get involved as undergraduates in
any kind of good bull, or any pranks, any jokes?
Well, no. It was really difficult to do, given the
time that we had, limited time. I wouldn't want to
say that I was all serious and no play, but
we were... You have to understand, my parents had
reared us pretty consistently. And so, doing some
pranks was pretty much not one of those things we
did.
I really can't remember. In terms of going to
class, what were your rules about going to class,
and what kind of behavior did you try to follow in a
class? I tried to attend every class. I was very...
As much as possible. I guess my classes... One of
the things that I began to really enjoy a lot were my
sociology and philosophy classes. Doctor,
he was a biologist,
he taught a social biology course, older
gentleman. And he opened my eyes to a lot of
discussions about the effects of ecology, the
effects of sociology and biology. And so, those
classes were... Gary Halter was one of my
professors. They
opened my eyes a lot to the whole notion of who I was,
who we were as a society. And again, politically
speaking, things were changing in the state in 69
to 73. I mean, there was a lot of Hispanic groups
rising. There was a lot of issues about race
issues, ethnic issues across the country. So,
those were just really tough. Yeah. ¿How did you
get to know each other? What was your family like?
Can you take it? We were talking about key people.
And you said Gary Halter... Doctor Van Riper, who
at the time when I started... And I remember him as
the department head in political science. He
later on served as a reference for me to law school.
So obviously he was quite... Did you have any
courses with him? Yes. I took a graduate course
with him in personnel management. I was, I took 12
hours in grad school, though my heart was not in it
because of circumstances that had changed for me.
I,
when I finished college, I got admitted to St.
Mary's Law School, but because I didn't plan well
enough, I was in love, my mind was a little
confused, I decided to hold back. And, but as good
fortune happens, I was offered a job as assistant
director of admissions involving the
recruitment of students. So all those things
being what they were, I thought, you know, I'll put
off law school for a while. It all, it bothered me a
lot, and of course later on I did, eight years later
I did go to law school, seven years later, but that
was, that happened. All right, all right. And as
you progressed? As you progressed through A&M,
what, was there someone that became your advisor
that you went to for advice and counsel?
There was a gentleman by the name of,
my brain is just going out on me here, he was a
political science professor who happened to be a
lawyer. Jack Woods? Jack Woods. Describe him.
Jack Woods was a. He was a professor, I guess he was
an adjunct professor perhaps, but he was a lawyer.
And he was the first lawyer that I really got to know
and talk, and he was, I took constitutional law
under him and judicial process under him. And he
really, really excited me about the law, and the
class, the way he taught it. And he was a person that
I could talk to, and we talked a lot about, about
school. A couple of times I talked to him. He was a
great teacher. Yeah. He invited me over to go to his
house. In fact, he also served as a letter of
reference for me. And I guess it, what it did, his
relationship with me and my relationship to him,
helped me with more ease and more comfort talk
about, you know, what I wanted to do. It wasn't so
much just a strictly uncomfortable discussion,
but a very comfortable discussion about
opportunities and challenges. And he also
happened to be a very strong faith-based
individual who didn't mind sharing that with me.
All right. Now, was he or someone else the one who
would help you pick out your courses your junior
and senior year? No. I don't remember if there was
anybody in particular. A lot of times it may have
been the department secretary who knew about as
much about what was offered and what was not
offered. But, I mean, I think it was a combination
of faculty like Gary Halter and Jack Woods and Dr.
Paul and Riper who, you know, you begin to, one
began to kind of feel comfortable with. Looking
back, were there any courses that you now realize
were quite important to you? I think my course in
philosophy, my course in social biology, and
my sociology courses that I took. I think they
helped me think about a lot about communities and
society. And the courses I took with Jack Woods
helped me think about what law school was going to
be like. Was there any A&M-related experience
that you now realize was life-changing to you? All
right. Thank you. Mm-hmm.
Oh, let me see here. Life-changing. No accidents?
No sheer coincidences? No. I don't think so. No? I
mean, it was a... I'm
assuming you didn't flunk a course. No, I didn't. I
didn't flunk a course.
I had a, I guess when I was a sophomore, I had a real
eye-opener in my own personal life. I had, and it
really, for about six months to a year, I had a
failed relationship with this young lady. And it
really just shook me up in terms of what I wanted to
do with my career, my work, and my life. And it
really just shook me up because I had to really get
ahold of my roots to say, what am I going to do? And as
good fortune would have, I went to work in Chicago
with the United Methodist Church as a missionary,
urban missionary. And that really transformed my
thinking about myself. And when I came back to
school my junior year... Oh, yeah. Yeah. My junior
year, it really just, I was dedicated, and
actually my grades started getting better and
made the dean's list about two or three times and,
you know, really got myself back on track. How long
were you up there? First summer. First summer.
What I would do in the summers is that I would work as
a youth director in various churches. I did that
for three different, four different
communities. Now, one of my normal questions is
about religious groups on the campus. Your
primary activity that was related to religion was
at the United Methodist Church in Bryan. Is that
right? It was Oak Grove United Methodist Church.
It was a church my father founded. Oak Grove. Oh.
And where, what part of town is it? It's in West
Bryan, off of 21 and 6, and it's a Hispanic United
Methodist Church. How big was it then? Oh,
probably about 150 members. Mm. And so that's
where you attended. I attended there on Sundays
and, but I also, during the week, the Baptist
Student Union had a great lunch on certain days and
a great speaker. And so my brother and a couple of my
buddies, we would all, we'd come and eat at the BSU.
At the BSU. At the BSU. My son. At the BSU. And so that
was my junior or senior year. Mm-hmm. And it was, it
was great. Now, did anybody ever tease you about a
group of Methodists coming over to eat Baptist
food or anything like that? No. I think it was
intended that everybody would, I think
everybody, even from the Wesley Foundation, went
over there. I mean, they were, the Wesley
Foundation had their own, but it was not
comparable. It was just a great program they had
there. As far as you can recall, describe the
religious groups and their activities on the
campus in those days. Well, the most I can
remember, of course, I remember going to the
All-Face Chapel a few times for a couple of, for
some weddings, and I guess the strongest group
that I remember were the Baptists, because they
had the Baptist Student Union and they would have
ongoing activities and sometimes you'd see stuff
where they were inviting people to come. But I
don't recall any particular. What about St.
Mary's? No. And I, it was there, but I really
didn't, it's right, it's right close to the Wesley
Foundation, but I never really was connected to
that because just not being Catholic and, strange
enough, most of my friends were Protestants, they
were Baptist or Methodist or other Protestants
had been in my interest. And Religious Emphasis
Week was long gone from A&M by then, wasn't it?
Yeah, I think so. I mean, I don't remember that
being celebrated. That's what I thought. It may
have been, but I don't remember it. Did you
encounter many A&M students who were of some other
religious background other than Christianity? A
few Jews, but not very many. How were they treated?
Same. I mean, it was no, I don't think that the Jews,
either in high school or in college, I don't
remember ever having
any particular, I mean, I guess if we had a
stereotype about them is that they were, you know,
they had a different way of, they didn't believe in
Jesus as a savior, but they were, I mean, for the
most part, I think the Jews that I encountered in
high school here, the Polycoffs were two brothers
that were.